Introduction. To help managers and leaders deal with conflict and problem-solving in the workplace, I have created a tool called the 'Balance of Influence Concept.' This tool dissects common issues faced by those in positions of power, creating a simplified view of what is happening. It is essential to note that this is just a concept, and not an exact science. We are all human, and because of that, we are all different. We all apply skills in different ways, and we all deal with problems with a unique approach. This is merely a tool to help guide your judgment. The Balance of Influence Concept: When you receive a promotion that places you in a position of power over lower-level employees, you are split in half: one half is a Manager , and the other half is a Leader . The two halves of you will, at times, have two very different agendas. There will be conflict, but they must work together. The golden rule is “ the manager works for the company, and the leader works for the people ” . The manager: The manager is required to carry out duties to gain the best results for the company. Your company is a machine; it needs every part to operate and turn in the right direction to be able to keep moving. If the parts don't work , or move in the wrong direction, the machine fails, and so does the company. If the company fails, it has no purpose. The company will place managers in many positions around the machine to monitor its progress, ensure everything is working as it should , predict future problems and work to avoid them. The leader: The leader works for the people; the people do not work for the leader. Your sole purpose as a leader is to facilitate the people who work below you. You are there for them, to make sure they have everything they need to carry out their role. From a safe working environment to guidance and direction, if the people have a problem, you are there to help them resolve it and develop them to become better-rounded employees. If the leader can carry out their role effectively, the people will thrive, results will be produced, and the machine will keep moving. How do the two worlds collide ? The manager and the leader have the same single objective: survival. Sometimes this survival instinct can be focused on just one role, the manager, or the leader. For example, we often see people in a position of power who are exceptional at one role but not the other: Good manager, bad leader : All the numbers are up to date, tasks are completed to the highest standard, and the machine moves at a good pace, producing high-level results for the company. But the people are not a priority; decisions are made solely to benefit the company, not the staff. Because of this, the people have no love for their leader, and only do as they are told out of respect for the position they hold. Although results are produced, there is no longevity in this success, and cracks will eventually form; people will leave or stop performing. Good leader, bad manager : The people are happy; their leader looks out for them and makes sure all their needs are met. They work in a safe and happy environment and have the utmost respect for their leader. But this leader puts the needs of the people too high above the needs of the company. Decisions that benefit the efficiency of the machine are not made, results are produced at a low level, and the company moves slowly forward. Although the people are happy, if results are low, survival is tough. When you are granted the position of power, you will feel the pull in two directions; the company will pull on the manager, and the people will pull on the leader. It is very easy, and very common, to let go of one and allow yourself to be pulled in just one direction. The examples above are a testament to this. The reason why we see these two types of pe ople in power is all down to a perception of what they personally believe is more important: the company or the people. The company: They pay your wages. It is safe to say that the main driver for your employment is because you need the financial reward for turning up each day . If you didn't need this to live, chances are you wouldn't be there. So why would you not turn up every day with the company's best interests at the forefront of every decision you make? The people: They are the ones that give you that personal value , and this value can sometimes mean more than just the number s in your wages; it's about how it makes you feel. When we choose a partner in life, it's not about numbers; it's about love. You're with them because of how it makes you feel. The people who work below you can produce the same feelings. They can show you respect and love, and when this is more valuable than those numbers in the bank, then it is obvious where you’re prioritise l ie . To help us better understand this idea of the manager and leader I have created the “ B alance of I nfluence Concept” . In this , we explore the four different situations a person of power can find themselves in : The situation types : Type 1 – The golden child Good manager Bad Leader Type 2 – The hero Bad manager Good leader Type 3 – The dream Good manager Good leader Type 4 – Pointless Bad manager Bad leader In any situation , the person of power will fall into one of these types. Understand which one you are working in and what the consequences are. Type 1 – The golden child Manager: As the golden child , you understand what is in the best interests of the company and carry out every action you can to uphold its values and beliefs. Leader: Your workforce must take second place. Although their values may be strong, they are not what you decide to be the most important in this situation. Type 2 – The hero Manager: As the hero , your actions do not predominantly have the best interest for the company ; your focus is not solely on the company’s reason for existence. Leader: Your subordinates are a high priority to you. You take great pride in upkeeping moral and go out of your way to attend to what they need. You work for them. Type 3 – The dream Manager: As the dream , you understand what is in the best interests of the company and carry out every action you can to uphold its values and beliefs. Leader: Your subordinates are a high priority to you. You take great pride in upkeeping moral and go out of your way to attend to what they need. You work for them. Type 4 – Pointless Manager: Your actions do not predominantly have the best interest for the company ; your focus is not solely on the company’s reason for existence. Leader: Your workforce must take second place. Although their values may be strong, they are not what you decide to be the most important in this situation. I have used this model as a training aid for management and leadership development in front line emergencies services; a workplace in which decision-making can become risk critical . Lives can be saved or lost based on a single decision. This model has helped developing emergency response staff understand the situations they will find themselves in and work towards effective control of them. Although the line of work in emergency services can have prescriptive decision-making mapped out through operational policy and procedure, it is more the office-based decisions that this model has helped with. Dealing with the routine running of the non-operational environment has brought up many opportunities for staff to find themselves in the above situations. This model can also share insight on the decisions that their line managers make, helping learners label them and learn from their pitfalls. I run scenario-based training around this concept , placing each learner in the hot seat for decision-making and discussing the four situation types this brings. This has helped in understanding the consequences of bad decisions and how to avoid them. So, which is the best type? Throughout the training around this concept, one of the key learning outcomes observed is that “the Dream” is to the best option. This comes as quite obvious at first, keeping both the company and the people happy clearly defines the best outcome in any situation this concept can bring. But interestingly enough , when evaluated against the actions of the other three types, the out come of “the dream” typically mirrors “the golden child”. Further analysis of this tells us that the role of “the golden child” is not without just - reasoning. The company are the reason for your existence within this environment, so why would you not give them what they want? And if the company casts a judgment about what should happen , then surly it must be for a reason ? Unless there are elements at play that the com pany are unaware of, then these decisions must be treated as a priority. But how do we be “the dream”? – Compromise. Through every training session carried out, the learners work to identify that the key to making everyone happy is compromise. This clearly does not come easy or without effort , but through careful consideration and critical thinking a plan is always developed. Communication is key. It can sometimes be as simple as this , do the people understand? Does the company understand? The role of an effective manager, and leader, is communication. Perspectives When we receive an order from above, is this coming from the company or another leader? The answer is perspective. We have labelled the role of the manager as working for the company. This has been purposefully simplified to better understand and apply the concept. But the reality is that the company , is just another leader. Just as we describe your role as a leader that works for the people, the underlying truth is that this is replicated throughout the hierarchy of your organisation. Looking upwards, the company is a leader, and the people is you. Someone above you has made a decision, how this is viewed is defined by may characteristics: They way in which it is delivered: Is it overly authoritative or Some typical personality traits associated : Good manager, bad leader Identifies as introverted Academic Thrives when in control Good leader, bad manager Identifies as extroverted Not academic Does not seek to control Because these personality traits are almost exact opposites it is easy to see why people in power can allow themselves to be pulled in just one direction . But these traits are not a definition of ‘you’ , t hey are a characteristic. C haracteristics can be interpreted by their owners as something that defines them , but they are merely built upon past experience . Therefore new experiences can create new characteristics and help guide you in new directions.
