4682 1185243 0 0 -1033 1376378 0 0 3874770 7019925 People 40000 20000 People -518795 1629410 Company 40000 20000 Company 3888740 4276725 Leader 40000 20000 Leader -682625 4263390 Manager 40000 20000 Manager The situation types : Type 1 – The golden child Good manager Bad Leader Type 2 – The hero Bad manager Good leader Type 3 – The dream Good manager Good leader Type 4 – Pointless Bad manager Bad leader In any situation the person of power will fall into one of these types . Understand which one you are working in, and what the consequences are. Type 1 – The golden child Manager: As the golden child you understand what is in the best interests of the company and carry out every action you can to uphold its values and beliefs. Leader: Your workforce must take second place. A lthough their values may be strong, they are not what you decide to be the most important in this situation . Type 2 – The hero Manager: As the hero your actions do not predominantly have the best interest for the company, you r focus is not solely on the company’s reason for existence. Leader: Your subordinates are a high priority to you. You take great pride in up keeping moral and go out of your way to attend to what they need. You work for them. Type 3 – The dream Manager: As the dream you understand what is in the best interests of the company a nd carry out every action you can to uphold its values and beliefs. Leader: You r subordinates are a high priority to you. You take great pride in up keeping moral and go out of your way to attend to what they need. You work for them. Type 4 – Pointless Manager: Your actions do not predominantly have the best interest for the company, your focus is not solely on the company’s reason for existence. Leader: Your workforce must take second place. Although their values may be strong, they are not what you decide to be the most important in this situation. SUB&gt;STNO – Management and leadership development Objective: Trainers to give the candidates input on what the “Person of power concept” is by illustrating on white board / flip chart. Using this concept discuss with the candidates the situations we will face as a person of power in their new role, and the challenges it brings. Talk though each of the situation types and discuss the benefits . Are there situations where only one type can be used? Talk through case studies and ask candidates to complete appendix 1. Case studies: 1 – Your station commander has emailed you about a piece of gym equipment being inappropriately stored in the appliance bay. This equipment is not supplied by the brigade or welfare and does not comply with risk assessment for the appliance bay. The SC h as asked to you have it removed and taken off station immediately . You crew express that this piece of gy m equipment is not causing a problem to anyone and would like it to stay as it is used regularly by most watch’s . 2 – You are informed about a LFF bring transferred in from another station to join your watch. You hear rumours that this individual is not in the Union and had once broken the picket lines during FBU strike action. Your watch are not happy. One of your Firefighters is offering to act up just to bloke this move. Neither you or your watch have ever heard of or met this person before. 3 – You r station has a specialist appliance of which you need to have a certain number of Firefighters trained to ride. One of your Firefighters have only done two years in the LFB and consider themselves inexperienced. This F irefighter is required to complete the specialist appliance training to keep up with your required ridership. They are refusing to do the planned training course, informing you they will go sick. 4 – You are contact at late notice to take the pump ladder down to the local community centre and hand out fire safety advice at an open day. Your crew are not happy with the short notice and t he timings clash with your planned mealtimes . The mess manager has just starting cooking and states the food will be spoiled if left. Your diver informs you that there is an appliance defect that they can ‘escalate’ to keep the pump ladder status zero at station. 5 – One of your crew have returned for holiday after leaving their car in the yard (as agreed by SC), T heir car key is locked in the office safe. Keys to the safe are in the pocket of another one of your officers who is out on a protracted incident. The Firefighter returning from holiday lives two hours away and wants to go home. Some of your crew state they can break into the safe , but they might damage it . 6 – You are on a night shift, two crew members from the day watch have stumbled into the watch room after going out for a few drinks. They said they have agreed with another Firefighter (same gender) to share their dorm and stay over. This is the first time you are hearing this arrangement. Appendix 1 Case study No. Type 1 The golden child Manager actions: Leader actions: Type 2 The hero Manager actions: Leader actions: Type 3 The dream Manager actions: Leader actions: Type 4 Pointless Manager actions: Leader actions:
